RFC-0033: Graph Query (#33)
partiql/partiql-docs: RFCs/0025-graph-data-model.md

SELECT i, v FROM my_list AS v AT i
```

For the graph data type, we model something very similar. A graph is a collection of *vertices* and *edges*, 
where edges connect pairs of vertices and can be directed or undirected.

> Vertices and edges have *labels* (similar to the attribute names in struct). 

Reviewer: I think we should have some clarifying text around what this actually means.  I think it is different from the `struct` example as there is a 1-to-1 correspondence there between attribute names and values.

Author: A PartiQL struct does allow repeating attribute names (with different values at them), doesn't it?  So, intuitively, these settings are about the same, in my view: neither a struct's attribute name nor a graph's label are a perfect "address".  Of course, repeating an attribute in a struct seem to be a discouraged corner case, while repeating labels in a property graph is more like the norm.    
Overall, I am not sure what can be said here without getting into the weeds...

Another wart here is that we (as well as GPML) allow multiple labels on a node/edge. I intentionally wrote line 68 to glide past this matter, since this is an intro/intuition text.

> There is also a **value at** each vertex and edge, which can be any PartiQL value.

Reviewer: This is an interesting wording choice, I am interested to get your take on the distinction from the original text.

As an important example, *labeled property graphs (LPG)* of the GPML paper[^2] are modeled 
straightforwardly in PartiQL: a value at each vertex and edge is restricted to be a PartiQL struct.

<!-- TODO: The following RDF example may need adjustments to fit with the finalized data model.
     E.g., NULL labels may have to become empty label sets.  -->
Similarly, Resource Description Framework (RDF)[^1] graphs could be modeled in PartiQL by having non-literal, non-blank
vertices and edges labeled by URI strings with their values being NULL. RDF literals could be a NULL labeled node with
their value being any corresponding PartiQL value (this is a generalization of RDF as literals are only strings in RDF’s
model). RDF blank nodes can be denoted with a label that never conflicts with URI such as **`_:my_blank`** (**`_`** is
never a valid scheme for a URI).

Even though PartiQL defines a very general graph data model, it is *not required* that a host database actually supports arbitrary
values at vertices or edges. This is similar to PartiQL over a relational database, where attributes of a row are
restricted to scalars.

> ## Addition to the PartiQL data model

Reviewer: *Minor*: Should this and other section headings be in [title case][1]?

[1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Title_case

As outlined above, graphs are introduced as a new category of "native" values in the PartiQL
data model, on par with scalar literals, structs, lists, and bags:

```EBNF
<partiql value> ::= 
      <absent value>
    | <scalar value>
    | <tuple value>
    | <collection value>
    | <graph value>                  //new
```
Consequently, graph values can occur as members of structs, bags, and lists.

## Graph data model

> For the graph values themselves, rather than giving a grammar -- as PartiQL specification does for
> other values -- we will define an abstract data model, largely following the one for PGML[^2].
> One of the reasons is that a concrete syntax for graph literals could emerge from ISO/IEC
> standardization, possibly as part of GQL, but no public information is yet available about
> that effort.  When appropriate, graph literals in PartiQL would be covered in a separate RFC.

Reviewer: Minor edits suggested below.  It is "GPML" versus "PGML", right?

```suggestion
For graph values themselves, rather than giving a grammar--as the PartiQL specification does for
other values--we will define an abstract data model, largely following the one for GPML[^2].
We do this because a concrete syntax for graph literals could emerge from ISO/IEC
standardization, possibly as part of GQL, but no public information is yet available about
that effort.  When appropriate, graph literals in PartiQL would be covered in a separate RFC.
```

A *graph* (a PartiQL *graph value*) is a tuple

>  < **Nodes**, **Edges**, **ends**, **labels**, **pay** >

where

- **Nodes** is a finite set of the *nodes* of the graph;

> - **Edges** is a finite set of the *edges* of the graph;

Reviewer: Do we have to have a property that identifies each member of these sets?

- **ends** **:** **Edges** --> (**Nodes** *x* **Nodes**) union { {u,v} | u, v in **Nodes** }   
  is a total function mapping each edge to its *endpoints*,
  which are an either ordered or an unordered pair of nodes;
- **labels** **:** (**Nodes** union **Edges**) --> P( *string_value* )
  is a total function that maps each node and each edge to a set of string labels;
- **pay** **:** (**Nodes** union **Edges**) --> *partiql_value* \ {`MISSING`}
  is a total function that maps each node and each edge to its *payload*,

>   which is a PartiQL value that cannot be `MISSING`.

Reviewer: I think we should call this **payload**, I was a little puzzled by the shorthand at first

> The inhabitants of the sets **Nodes** and **Edges** are understood abstractly; all that is known
> about them is given by the functions **ends**, **labels**, and **pay**.  Intuitively, one can think
> of graph nodes and edges as uninterpreted identifiers, perhaps corresponding to some
> implementation-specific memory locations.

Reviewer: Oh here is the notion of identity.

A possibly more succinct wording follows:
```suggestion
The members of the sets **Nodes** and **Edges** are some enumeration of unique identifiers such that the structure of the graph is defined in the functions **ends**, **labels**, and **pay**.
```

The primary difference of this graph definition from the *property graph* in GPML[^2] is
the payload function **pay**: a property graph, instead, has a partial function that,
given a node (or an edge) can, given a property name, associate the latter with a value.
Otherwise, most comments and examples given in [^2] for the definition apply to the

> definition here as well.

Reviewer: Is the function really partial?

> ## Data Model

Reviewer: Isn't the previous section more aptly the data model now?
